Welcome back.
OK.
OK I may have lied a little bit before we can talk about memory leaks.
We have to understand this concept of garbage collection.
JavaScript is a garbage collected language that means when javascript allocates memory let's say within
a function we create an object and that object gets stored somewhere in our memory heap automatically
with JavaScript when we finish calling the function and let's say we don't need that object anymore.
It's going to clean it up for us.
So javascript automatically frees up this memory that we no longer use and will collect our garbage
just like this.
So only the data that is still useful to us remains so that this way we make sure we don't use up all
the memory we have available because as we know memory is limited.
How nice is that now.
In garbage collected languages like Javascript the garbage collector freeze memory on the heap and prevents
what we call memory leaks.
That is when the memory gets too big too big until we reach our maximum size like we did with Stack
Overflow but that is hypothetically there's no perfect system right.
And garbage collection gives us a false sense of security that oh we don't have to worry about memory
management because this garbage collection is done automatically and it's smart enough to figure out
what we need and while we don't but again this is actually a big mistake.
It gives javascript developers the false impression that they can choose not to care about memory management.
And as you'll see there are ways to actually make mistakes where the garbage collection won't actually
free up the memory and you still have little pieces of box this year that don't have any reference or
don't point to anything really that are still hanging around now in low level languages like C you control
garbage collection and you tell it to remove parts of the memory.
Now that's very very dangerous but it's also the reason that programs like C are extremely fast and
memory efficient because you control garbage collection and with that control you can make it really
really optimized.
So how does garbage collection actually work in JavaScript.
Well it uses something called Mark and sweep algorithm and this is a great video that shows how it works.
Imagine on the left here are variables that we have in our program and these variables point to different
objects and perhaps an object points to another object and so on and so forth.
And as soon as we remove that reference from that object well it should get deleted right for example
object 5 we don't need anymore because nothing is linking to it.
So if we run this we mark while we need we sweep while we don't and that's how garbage collection works
if we look at this through code we can simply show that in action by using human over here in our object.
If I all of a sudden and let's change this to a var so we can assign it something else and we'll say
that var or human now equals 5.
Well this piece of memory that is my mate my name first name and last name is still in the memory heap
but we don't need it anymore.
Nothing is referencing that piece of code or perhaps this human variable was just inside this function
and once this function is done executing and it's popped off the stack.
Well we don't need that variable anymore so the garbage collector is going to mark and sweep and clean
this from memory and now that we understand how garbage collector works we can take advantage of this
and show you how memory leaks happen.
I'll see you in the next video.
Bobby.